# Introduction

We live in a digital world where big tech companies dominate almost every part
of our online lives. They control huge amounts of data, critical services, and
even the infrastructure we use every day. Their reach is so extensive that some
people have compared their ecosystems to a kind of “botnet” a word usually
reserved for networks of hijacked devices used for shady purposes. In this
intro, I’ll break down why that comparison makes sense and why protecting
ourselves from their control has become a privacy necessity.

Some researchers say that "Google has become the main interface for our whole
reality". To be precise: with the Google interface, the user gets the impression
that the search results imply a kind of totality. In fact, one only sees a small
part of what one could see if one also integrates other research
tools".--[Wikipedia Criticism_of_Google](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_Google#cite_note-54)

## The Privacy Imperative

The term "botnet" fits because big tech companies control vast networks of
devices and services, all connected and managed from the top down. Just like a
botnet hijacks many computers to work together, often without users knowing.
These companies coordinate enormous amounts of data and user activity across
their ecosystems. This massive, centralized control quietly shapes what users
see and do online, making the comparison to a botnet a powerful way to highlight
their reach and influence.

Getting out of these monopolized ecosystems matters. Here’s why:

1. Google’s entire model revolves around ads, which means tracking practically
   everything you do online. Apple may market itself as privacy-friendly, but
   keep in mind its walled garden also benefits from collecting user data to
   refine its services. In both cases, you become the product. Stepping away
   from these systems is the first step toward truly owning and controlling your
   own data.

2. For most people, privacy policies are unreadable walls of text. That’s by
   design. Both companies collect and share data in ways that remain
   intentionally murky to the average user. Like a traditional botnet running
   quietly in the background, this surveillance often happens without you
   realizing it. Switching to transparent, privacy-focused services makes a big
   difference here.

3. When a few companies dominate the market, smaller players pushing for
   privacy-first solutions simply can’t compete. Big tech’s grip on users
   starves the competition of oxygen, keeping better alternatives from reaching
   mainstream adoption. Supporting decentralized or independent alternatives not
   only protects your privacy but also encourages innovation.

4. Centralized power is always vulnerable. Whether it’s hackers, inside abuse,
   or government pressure, the massive troves of data held by Google and Apple
   are high-value targets. A botnet is dangerous precisely because of its size
   and coordination. Similarly, one breach in these systems can expose millions.
   Distributing and decentralizing your digital life reduces this risk
   dramatically.

Saying "I have nothing to hide" ignores the fact that privacy is not just for
oneself, but protects everyone, including those who may be vulnerable or
targeted. Privacy guarantees freedom of thought, expression, and association,
which are essential for a just society. When these rights are undermined,
history shows that entire populations can be harmed

Throughout _privacy-book_ I will share my research into this deep rabbit hole
and will attempt to keep the information up-to-date. For now it's not meant to
be read cover to cover, just pick the link/chapter you're interested in and go
from there.
